---
tags: dsh
---

# Data Safe Haven Monthly Meeting template

::: spoiler TOC
[TOC]
:::

## Schedule

|   Time      |   Item   |
|-------------|----------|
| 0 - 10 mins  | Project update overview |
| 10 - 15 mins | Last month actions status |
| 15 - 50 | Agenda items and required actions |
| 50 - 60 | Actions and delegation |

## Attendees

* Arielle Bennett
* Jim Madge
* David Sarmiento Perez
* Arron Lacey
* Ed Chalstrey
* Kirstie Whitaker
* Jules Manser
* Matt Craddock
* Hari Sood
* Martin O'Reilly
* James Robinson
* Arron Lacey

### In attendance

 
### Apologies


## Project updates

DSH repos and boards explainer issue [here](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/data-safe-haven-team#useful-links)

[Project unified board](https://github.com/orgs/alan-turing-institute/projects/111)

[Ways of work](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/data-safe-haven-team/blob/main/WaysofWork.md)

<!--
Brief overview of project uptades, what relevant things have been done or happened?
e.g.:
- Finalised strategy sessions
- SATRE status: work underway, survey finalised and about to share
- TRESA process revisited and in place (mostly) 
- May DSG happening in person next week
- Strategy meeting, 3rd held, 4th planned
- TRESA: service area cost centre may now require executive agreement
- FY 22-23 Recharges made
-->



## Agenda
- [name=David/facilitator] Last month's action points
- [name=Ed] TRESA updates
- [name=Goal owner] Goal report



### Last month's action points



### Agenda Item

#### Relevant notes for context eg, last month's



#### This month updates

#### Actions


### Other points




### All Actions summary



### Final reflections
